Mantis shrimps are usually 2 to 7 inches long. Larger species grow 12 inches in length.
Mantis shrimps are brightly colored. Shell of most species is covered with different hues of blue, green, red and orange colors. Forearms are often covered with spots.
Eyes of mantis shrimp are located on the long stalks that can move independently. They have exceptional eyesight that is used both for the detection of the prey and predators.
Mantis shrimps have the most complex eyes in the animal kingdom that can see ultraviolet and polarized light. They have trinocular vision which means that they can see one objects using one of the three different parts of eye.
All mantis shrimps can be divided on spearers and smashes, based on the morphology of appendages and tactic they use to kill the prey.
Spearers have spiny appendages that are used to stab soft-bodied prey such as different types of worms and fish.
Smashers have club-like appendages that easily smash shell of snails, oysters, crustaceans and mollusks.
Attack of mantis shrimps happens extremely quickly - 50 times faster than the blink of an eye. With velocity of 10 meters per second, their punch has the power of a .22 caliber bullet.
Smashers are famous for their incredible strong punches that can break the glass of aquarium.
Most species of mantis shrimps are solitary and territorial creatures. They fiercely defend their home against intruders.
Mantis shrimps are able to recognize their neighbors by the smell and by the morphological characteristics.
Some species of mantis shrimp are monogamous and spend up to 20 years together. During the mating rituals, mantis shrimps often fluoresce.
Females can lay eggs in the burrows or keep them in their forelimbs until they hatch. Some species exhibit parental care. Female lays two sets of eggs, one for her and the other for the father to take care of the eggs until they hatch.
Larvae of mantis shrimps swim as a part of zooplankton up to 3 months. They show aggressive behavior even during the larval stage.
Mantis shrimp can survive more than 20 years in the wild.